A Brief Presentation of the Nine Vehicles

by Alak Zenkar Rinpoche Thubten Nyima

Our teacher, the fourth guide of this fortunate aeon, the incomparable lord of sages, Śākyamuni,
gave infinite teachings as means to enter the Dharma of the causal and resultant vehicles,
in accordance with the particular temperaments, spiritual faculties and attitudes of
disciples. Nevertheless, they may all be included within the three vehicles, which, in turn,
may be further subdivided into nine successive stages.

As The General Sūtra says:[1]

The ultimate definitive vehicleCertainly appears as three in number:The vehicles of leading
from the origin, Vedic-like asceticism,And powerful transformative methods.

And The Immaculate Confession Tantra says:

The samayas of the nine successive vehicles—Three vehicles related to the three piṭakas of characteristics,The
outer three of kriyā yoga and so on, related to tantras of asceticism,And
the inner three yogas related to tantras of skilful methods.

Thus the classification of ‘nine successive vehicles,’ which is found in the Nyingma Early Translation
tradition, is made up of:

three outer vehicles of leading from the origin [of suffering] or those related to the three
piṭakas of characteristics,three inner vehicles of Vedic-like asceticism[2] or those of the
three outer classes of tantra, andthree secret vehicles of powerful transformative methods
or those of the three inner classes of tantra.

Let us elaborate a little on the meaning of these, first of all by considering what is meant
by the term ‘vehicle’ or yāna. It is said in The Condensed Sūtra:[3]

This vehicle is the supreme of vehicles for reachingThe vast sky-like palace of happiness and
bliss.Riding in this all beings will reach nirvāṇa.

This refers to the literal meaning of the Sanskrit term yāna, a vehicle or means of conveyance,
since it is that which carries us along the paths and bhūmis, bringing us ever greater
enlightened qualities.

I. The Three Outer Vehicles Leading from the Origin

The three causal vehicles of characteristics are: the śrāvaka vehicle, pratyekabuddha vehicle
and bodhisattva vehicle.

Why are these three called ‘vehicles leading from the origin’? It is because they lead us along
the path to the result of liberation from samsara by abandoning all the actions and kleśas
which are the cause or ‘origin’ [of suffering].

1. The Śrāvaka Vehicle

Generally speaking, the Sanskrit word ‘śrāvaka’ has both the meaning of listening and of hearing,
so [the Tibetan translation nyenthö literally means] ‘listener-hearer.’ Alternatively,
the term can be understood to mean ‘listening and proclaiming,’ in the sense that the śrāvakas
rely on masters and then proclaim to others all the words their teachers have spoken.

The initial entry point, the view, the meditation, the conduct and the results of the śrāvaka
vehicle will now be explained below.

i. Entry Point

The śrāvakas are motivated by a feeling of renunciation, the wish to escape from all the realms
of samsara by themselves alone. With this motivation, they receive one of the seven sets
of pratimokṣa vows, those of a male or female lay practitioner, novice monk or nun, probationary
nun, or fully ordained monk or nun, and having received these vows, they practise
moral restraint, keeping their vows unimpaired, repairing any impairments that do occur,
and so on.

ii. View

As the basis of their path, they determine their view by focusing upon all phenomena included
within the five aggregates and realizing that they are devoid of any personal self. They
do not understand that all material and conscious phenomena are devoid of true reality, and,
asserting a truly real partless particle in perceived objects and an indivisible moment
of consciousness, they fail to realize the absence of phenomenal identity.

iii. Meditation

In terms of the path, they practise both śamatha and vipaśyanā meditation. They realize the
state of śamatha by abandoning obstacles and cultivating factors conducive to samādhi, according
to the nine stages of resting the mind and so on, and generate the wisdom of vipaśyanā
by meditating on the sixteen aspects of the four truths.

iv. Conduct

They keep to the twelve ascetic practices[4] that avoid the two extreme forms of lifestyle,
over-indulgence in sense pleasures[5] and excessive self-punishment.

v. Results

They attain any one of eight levels of fruition, corresponding to the degree to which they have
abandoned the kleshas of the three realms. There are eight levels because the four results
of stream-enterer, once-returner, non-returner and arhat are each divided into the two
stages known as the emerging and the established.

2. The Pratyekabuddha Vehicle

Pratyekabuddhas, or ‘self-awakened’ are so-called because, having a more profound depth of wisdom
than the śrāvakas, they manifest their own awakening through the power of their own
wisdom, without needing to rely on other masters.

Let us elaborate slightly by presenting the initial entry point, view, meditation, conduct and
results of the pratyekabuddha vehicle:

i. Entry Point

As with the entry point to the śrāvaka vehicle, the pratyekabuddhas take up any one of the seven
sets of pratimokṣa vows and then keep them unimpaired.

ii. View

When it comes to the basis of their path, how they determine the view, they realize the absence
of a personal self completely, but only realize half the absence of phenomenal identity,
because although they realize that the partless particles of perceived objects are not
real, they still believe in the true existence of indivisible moments of consciousness.

iii. Meditation

When it comes to their path, and their practice of meditation, the uncommon approach of the
pratyekabuddhas is to meditate on how the twelve links of interdependent origination arise
in their progressive sequence and how they cease in the reverse order.

iv. Conduct

Like the śrāvakas, they keep to the twelve rules of ascetic practice.

v. Results

As their fruition, those with sharper faculties attain the level of a rhinoceros-like pratyekabuddha
arhat and those with duller faculties become parrot-like[6] pratyekabuddha arhats.

Moreover, they reach their final existence as a result of three specific aspiration prayers.
They pray that their last existence may be in a world without buddhas and śrāvakas, that
they may attain awakening by themselves, without relying on any teacher, and that they may
teach the Dharma silently through physical gestures.

3. The Bodhisattva Vehicle

The bodhisattva vehicle is the part of the mahāyāna that belongs to the vehicle of characteristics.
It is called the vehicle of bodhisattvas because once it has been entered it has the
power to lead someone to great enlightenment, because its domain of experience is vast,
in terms of its extensive skilful methods and its profound wisdom, because it brings about
benefit and happiness, in the higher realms in the short term, and ultimately at the stage
of definitive good, and because it carries one to greater and greater qualities as one
progresses along the paths and stages. It is called a vehicle of characteristics because it
has all the characteristics of a path that is a direct cause for bringing about the ultimate
fruition, the level of buddhahood.

I will now a give a brief outline of its initial entry point, view, meditation, conduct and
results.

i. Entry Point

The bodhisattvas practise on the basis of their wish to benefit others. They are motivated by
bodhicitta, which has as its focus all sentient beings and is characterized by the wish
to establish them all at the level of perfect buddhahood, free from the causes and effects
of suffering and endowed with all the causes and effects of happiness. With this motivation,
they take the bodhisattva vows of aspiration and application in the proper way, through
the ritual of either the tradition of Profound View or Vast Conduct. They then observe the
points of discipline concerning what should be adopted and abandoned, and heal and purify
any impairments.

ii. View

Concerning the basis of their path, how they determine the view, if we speak in terms of philosophical
tenets, the approach of Mind Only is to assert that outer objects are not real
and all phenomena are but the inner mind, and to claim that the self-aware, self-knowing consciousness
devoid of dualistic perception is truly real. The approach of the Middle Way
is to realize that all phenomena appear in the manner of dependent origination, but are in
reality emptiness, beyond the eight extremes of conceptual elaboration.[7] Through these
approaches, on the basis of the explanation of the two levels of reality, they realize completely
the absence of any personal self or phenomenal identity.

iii. Meditation

Concerning their path and how they practise meditation, the bodhisattvas realize and train in
developing their familiarity with the indivisibility of the two levels of reality, and,
on the basis of the yogic meditation that unites śamatha and vipaśyanā, meditate sequentially
on the thirty-seven factors of enlightenment while on the path of training.

iv. Conduct

They practise the six transcendent perfections for their own benefit and the four means of attraction
for the sake of others.

v. Results

They attain the level of buddhahood, which is the ultimate attainment in terms of both abandonment
and realization since it means abandoning all that has to be eliminated, the two obscurations
including habitual traces, and realizing everything that must be realized, included
within the knowledge of all that there is and the knowledge of its nature. They accomplish
the two types of dharmakāya for their own benefit and the two types of rūpakāya for
the benefit of others.

II. The Three Inner Vehicles of Vedic-like Asceticism

These are the three outer classes of tantra: the vehicle of kriyā tantra, the vehicle of caryā
tantra and the vehicle of yoga tantra.

You might wonder why are these called ‘vehicles of Vedic-like asceticism.’ It is because the
three outer classes of tantra stress aspects of ascetic conduct, such as ritual purification
and cleanliness, and in this respect they are similar to the Vedic tradition of the brahmins.

4. The Vehicle of Kriyā Tantra

The kriyā tantras, or ‘action’ tantras, are so-called because they are concerned mainly with
external conduct, the practices of ritual purification and cleanliness and so on.

The entry point, view, meditation, conduct and results of this vehicle are as follows:

i. Entry Point

The initial point of entry to the path of secret mantra vajrayana is ripening empowerment, so
here one receives the water empowerment, which establishes the potential for ripening into
the dharmakaya, and the crown empowerment, which establishes the potential for ripening
into the rūpakāya. Then one keeps the general samayas of the kriyā yoga as they are explained
in the particular texts themselves.

ii. View

In terms of determining the view, the basis of the path, one realizes that the ground of purification,
the nature of mind itself, is the wisdom of empty clarity, and is ultimately beyond
all extremes of elaboration, such as existing, not existing, appearing or being empty.
Then one views the aspects of relative appearance, which are what must be purified, as the
characteristics of the completely pure deity.

iii. Meditation

As for the path and the way of practising meditation, it centres around the four realities:
1) the reality of oneself, and 2) the reality of the deity, which is practised by means of
the six aspects of the deity,[8] by visualizing oneself as the samaya form and then invoking
the wisdom being into the space in front, considering oneself as a servant and the deity
as one’s master. One then focuses upon 3) the reality of the mantra recitation which is
the sound, and on the mind and the ground, and meditates upon 4) the reality of concentration,
which consists of remaining in the ‘flame,’ continuation of sound and culmination of
sound.

iv. Conduct

One performs the three kinds of ritual purification,[9] changes the three types of clothing,[10]
adopts a diet of the three white foods[11] and practices ritual fasting and mantra recitation.

v. Results

In the short term, one becomes a desire realm vidyādhara, and ultimately one attains awakening
as Vajradhara of one of the three buddha families: of the family of enlightened body, Vairocana,
of the family of enlightened speech, Amitābha, or of the family of enlightened mind,
Akṣobhya.

5. The Vehicle of Caryā Tantra

The vehicle of caryā or ‘conduct’ tantra is so-called because it places an equal emphasis on
the outer actions of body and speech and the inner cultivation of samādhi. It is also called
the ‘tantra of both’ (ubhaya tantra) because its view conforms with that of yoga tantra,
while its conduct is similar to that of kriyā.

I will now say a little about its entry point, view, meditation, conduct and results.

i. Entry Point

One is matured by means of the five empowerments, which include the empowerments of the vajra,
bell and name in addition to the water and crown empowerments, and then maintains the samayas
of caryā tantra, as described in the particular texts themselves.

ii. View

The view is determined in the same way as in the yoga tantra, so it will be explained below.

iii. Meditation

One visualizes oneself as the samaya being and visualizes the wisdom deity, who is regarded
as a friend, in front of oneself, and then practises the conceptual meditations on the syllable,
mudrā and form of the deity, and the non-conceptual meditation on absolute bodhicitta
by means of entering, remaining and arising.[12]

iv. Conduct

The conduct here is the same as in kriyā tantra.

v. Results

In the short term, one attains the common accomplishments and ultimately one reaches the level
of a vajradhara of the four buddha families, i.e., the three mentioned earlier plus the
ratna family.

6. The Vehicle of Yoga Tantra

The vehicle of yoga tantra is so-called because it emphasizes the inner yogic meditation upon
reality, combining skilful means and wisdom.

Its entry point, view, meditation, conduct and results are as follows:

i. Entry Point

Having been matured through the eleven empowerments—the five empowerments of the disciples (water,
crown, vajra, bell and name) as well as the six empowerments of the master (the empowerment
of irreversibility, empowerment of seeing secret reality, authorization, prophecy,
confirmation and praising encouragement)—one keeps the samayas as described in the particular
texts.

ii. View

The ground, the way in which the view is established, is as follows. Ultimately, all phenomena
are realised to be clear light, beyond conceptual elaboration. Through the blessing of
this, the relative is seen as the deities of the vajradhātu.

iii. Meditation

One meditates on the yoga of skilful means, visualizing oneself as the deity by means of the
five aspects of awakening and the four miraculous things,[13] and summons the wisdom being,
who then dissolves into oneself, and is sealed by means of the four mudrās, and so on.
There is also the yoga of wisdom, in which one rests in a state in which ultimate non-conceptual
wisdom is inseparable from the relative appearance of the deity of the vajradhātu.

iv. Conduct

One practises ritual purification and cleanliness simply as a support.

v. Results

As a worldly attainment, one becomes a celestial vidyādhara, and as the supermundane accomplishment,
one attains enlightenment in Ghanavyūha, as one of the five buddha families (in addition
to the four families previously mentioned, there is also Amoghasiddhi’s buddha family
of enlightened activity).

III. The Three Secret Vehicles of Powerful Transformative Methods

These are the three inner classes of tantra: the vehicle of mahāyoga, the vehicle of anuyoga
and the vehicle of atiyoga.

You might wonder why are these are called ‘vehicles of powerful transformative methods.’ It
is because they include powerful methods for transforming all phenomena into great purity
and equalness.

7. The Vehicle of Tantra Mahāyoga

The vehicle of mahāyoga, or ‘great yoga,’ is so-called because it is superior to ordinary yoga
tantra since all phenomena are realized to be a magical display in which appearance and
emptiness are indivisible.

Once again, I will briefly describe its point of entry, view, meditation, action and results.

i. Entry Point

Once one’s mind has been matured through receiving the ten outer benefiting empowerments, the
five inner enabling empowerments and the three secret profound empowerments, one keeps the
samayas as they are described in the texts.

ii. View

By means of extraordinary lines of reasoning, one establishes and then realizes the indivisibility
of the [two] higher levels of reality, according to which the cause for the appearance
of the essential nature, the seven riches of the absolute,[14] is spontaneously present
within the pure awareness that is beyond conceptual elaboration, and all relative phenomena
naturally appear as the mandala of deities of the three seats.[15]

iii. Meditation

When it comes to the path and the practice of meditation, the main emphasis is on the generation
stage. In the practice of generation stage yoga, one sets up the practice through the
three samādhis, ensures that the three of purifying, perfecting and ripening are complete
within the visualization, and, once the visualization is complete, seals it with the instruction
on the four nails securing the life-force. In the practice of the completion stage
yoga, one activates the vital points of the vajra body, its subtle energies, essences, luminosity
and so on.

iv. Conduct

One maintains elaborate, unelaborate and extremely unelaborate conduct.

v. Results

In the short term one reaches the four vidyādhara levels, which are the results belonging to
the path, and finally one gains the ultimate fruition, and reaches the level of the Vajradhara
of unity.[16]

8. The Vehicle of Scriptural Transmission Anuyoga

The vehicle of anuyoga, or ‘following yoga’, is so-called because it mainly teaches the path
of passionately pursuing (or ‘following’) wisdom, in the realization that all phenomena are
the creative expression of the indivisible unity of absolute space and primordial wisdom.

Once again, let us say a little about its point of entry, view, meditation, conduct and results:

i. Entry Point

One’s mind is matured through the thirty-six empowerments in which the four rivers—outer, inner,
accomplishing and secret—are complete, and one keeps the samayas as described in the
texts.

ii. View

Through logical reasoning one determines that which is to be known, the fact that all phenomena
are characterized as being the three mandalas in their fundamental nature, and realizes
that this is so.

iii. Meditation

Meditation practice here consists of two paths. On the path of liberation one practises the
non-conceptual samādhi of simply resting in a state that accords with the essence of reality
itself, and the conceptual samādhi of deity practice, in which one visualizes the mandala
of supporting palace and supported deities simply by reciting the mantra of generation.
On the path of skilful means one generates the wisdom of bliss and emptiness through the
practices of the upper and lower gateways.

iv. Conduct

One practises the conduct that is beyond adopting or abandoning in the recognition that all
perceptions are but the display of the wisdom of great bliss.

v. Results

At the culmination of Anuyoga’s own uncommon five yogas, which are essentially its five paths,[17]
and the ten stages[18] that are included within these five, one attains the level of
Samantabhadra.

9. The Vehicle of Pith Instruction Atiyoga

The vehicle of Atiyoga, or ‘utmost yoga,’ is so-called because it is the highest of all vehicles.
It involves the realization that all phenomena are nothing other than the appearances
of the naturally arising primordial wisdom which has always been beyond arising and ceasing.

The following is a brief explanation of the entry point, view, meditation, conduct and results
of this vehicle.

i. Entry Point

One’s mind is matured through the four ‘expressive power of awareness’ empowerments (rigpé tsal
wang), and one keeps the samayas as explained in the texts.

ii. View

The view is definitively established by looking directly into the naturally arising wisdom in
which the three kāyas are inseparable: the empty essence of naked awareness beyond the ordinary
mind is the dharmakāya, its cognizant nature is the sambhogakāya, and its all-pervasive
compassionate energy is the nirmāṇakāya.

iii. Meditation

The meditation consists of the approach of cutting through resistance to primordial purity (kadak
trekchö), through which the lazy can reach liberation without effort, and the approach
of the direct realization of spontaneous presence (lhundrup tögal), through which the diligent
can reach liberation with exertion.

iv. Conduct

The conduct is free from hope and fear and adopting and abandoning, because all that appears
manifests as the display of reality itself.

v. Results

Perfecting the four visions of the path, one gains the supreme kāya, the rainbow body of great
transference, and attains the level of glorious Samantabhadra, the thirteenth bhūmi known
as ‘Unexcelled Wisdom’ (yeshe lama).

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005, revised 2016 (with thanks to Han Kop).

An earlier version of this translation was published in Kyabje Zenkar Rinpoche & Pema Lungtok
Gyatso Rinpoche, The Nine Gradual Vehicles: Two Complementary Presentations. Brussels: Wisdom
Treasury, 2015.