Brief Biography of Drakkar Lobzang Palden

by Alak Zenkar Rinpoche[1]

The sublime Drakkar Lobzang Palden was born on the first day of the first month of the Fire
Tiger year (1866) at Druklang monastery (Triklung hermitage) in Kardzin (Kardze). His father
was called Samten Tsering and his mother, Tseringma.

When the child reached his fourth year he was recognized as a reincarnation of Drakkar Changchub
Gyaltsen and given the name Lobzang Palden Tendzin Nyendrak Palzangpo. In his fifth year,
he learned how to read and write from his teacher Dorje Bum. Then, from his ninth year
onwards, he studied with Bapuk Yongdzin Loden Chöpel, receiving instruction on the common
sciences, such as orthography, grammar and poetry, as well as a complete reading transmission
for the precious Translated Words of the Buddha (Kangyur), instructions on major texts
related to sūtra and mantra, and empowerments and transmissions for the profound Dharma
of both the New and Old traditions. He took ordination from Drungsar Lama Lobzang Palden
Tendzin Tsultrim, and with Gyarong Lama Könchok Zangpo he studied the grammatical treatises
of the Sārasvata system and guidebooks for yogic exercises in the Nyingtik tradition. From
Tutop Gyatso he received empowerments for the thirteen-deity Vajrabhairava practice.

At sixteen, he travelled to Lhasa and then entered Trehor College at Drepung Loseling. He took
Hor Drango Geshe Lobzang Wangchuk, the great abbot of Loseling, as his tutor for philosophy
and with him he studied the five major treatises extensively. He made a tour of the debate
grounds, and for each of the major texts, he memorized both the root verses and the
commentary. He mastered the key points and arrived at a definitive understanding through logical
reasoning. As a result, learned geshes heaped flowers of praise upon him. Based on
his learned responses in his debate with Jamyang Mipham Namgyal (1846–1912), his reputation
as a scholar grew.

From the powerful siddha Dharma Senge[2] he received medical teachings, empowerments and instruction
on Chöd and on the Sealed Secret (gsang ba rgya can) of the Fifth Dalai Lama; empowerments,
transmissions and instructions for the Longchen Nyingtik, and the writings of the
omniscient Longchenpa, as well as other profound and vast instructions, and took the master
as the lord of his buddha family. From the former abbot of Zhalu, Lobzang Khyenrab,[3]
he received the Thirteen Golden Dharmas of the Sakya tradition, as well as the Path with
its Fruit (Lamdré).

He took full ordination with the great Ganden throne-holder Yeshe Chöpel acting as preceptor.[4]
In his twenty-second year he returned to the region of Amdo and made Drakkar Changchub
Ling his seat.

He received the transmission of the Tengyur from Ling Yongdzin Choktrul and the major and minor
Lamrim treatises from Serong Jamyang Wangchuk Rabten. Nyagyé Choktrul granted him the
transmission for the collected writings of Tsongkhapa and his heirs, while Dza Lhasul Tenpé
Gyaltsen bestowed on him the empowerments for Guhyasamāja and Cakrasaṃvara. Jamzhe Kalzang
Tupten Wangchuk[5] offered him many teachings on the body maṇḍala of Cakrasaṃvara and so
on, and Shunang Lama Nyendrak taught him the Six-branch Kālacakra. Thus, he followed in
the proper way many learned and accomplished masters of both Old and New traditions. He studied
in an unbiased way works related to sūtra and mantra, of the Old and New traditions,
as well as mundane sciences. Through immersing himself in a great ocean of Dharma instruction
in this way, it filled the endless knot of his mind, and he reached the very pinnacle
of learning.

From the age of 26, he settled mainly in Mālanang, the hermitage of Drakkar, as well as Chöying
Monastery, Getar Lung in Drango and Palgang. There he taught such texts as the Five Treatises
of Maitreya, the Root Verses of the Middle Way, Introduction to the Middle Way and
Four Hundred Verses of the Middle Way, the Collection of Reasoning and Collection of Praises.
He travelled impartially to places such as Chöra Kyang, Kardze, Drango, Minyak, Sertar,
Golok Dodzi Rong and elsewhere, bestowing empowerments, transmissions and instructions
for Cakrasaṃvara, Guhyasamāja and Vajrabhairava, the Heart-Essence (Nyingtik), Pacification
and Severance and so on. In total, he transmitted the precious Translated Words of the Buddha
(Kangyur) fifteen times, the Translated Treatises (Tengyur) six times, The Collected
Nyingma Tantras (Nyingma Gyübum) five times, the Seven Treasures [of Longchenpa] three times,
and the collected writings of Jé Tsongkhapa five times. In addition, he granted the reading
transmissions for various masters’ collected writings and explained them with clarity,
authenticity and eloquence, such was his tremendous kindness in bestowing inexhaustible
gifts of Dharma. In this way, he guided everyone—noble, modest and in between.

His disciples, learned and accomplished figures from both Old and New schools, included Amdo
Geshe Jampal Rolwé Lodrö, Getok Choktrul Lodrö Gyurme Chökyi Wangchuk, Raho Choktrul Jamyang
Drubpé Wangpo, Gyurme Pendé Özer,[6] Tongkor Zhabdrung, Ganden Tritrul, Trungsar Kuzhab,
Dodrup Khenpo Damchö,[7] Khenpo Könmé,[8] Wönda Gyangtrul,[9] Washul Pönla, Dungkhar Tulku
Ngedön Gyatso,[10] and Minling Khenchen Ngawang Khyen-nor[11], in addition to the learned
Chinese monk Takang Hri,[11] and powerful leaders such as Washul Göndra.

His magnanimous activity, beyond the comprehension of ordinary minds, included the sponsorship
of supports of enlightened body, speech and mind, such as statues of Vajrasattva and Maitreya
in gold and copper and a Kangyur written in a golden script.[12]

Finally, on the third day of the eighth month of the Earth Snake year (1929),[13] he manifested
the departure of his wisdom-mind and the temporary cessation of his acts for those to
be trained.

The master’s collected writings include works that he composed between the ages of 12 and 62.
They cover poetry, praises, biographies of lineage masters, the five major treatises, the
root tantra of Guhyasamāja, commentaries on mantra and Dzogchen, as well as practice liturgies.
In total, they fill seventeen volumes and represent a stream of teaching to sustain
his remaining followers.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.