Light from the Wisdom Sun
A Sādhana of Noble Mañjuśrī, Supreme Deity of Deities
by Alak Zenkar Rinpoche

Wisdom of the infinite buddhas all gathered into one,Treasury of the wheels of inexhaustible
adornments,Foremost friend to all beings, teacher to all three worlds,You who are inseparable
from Mañjughoṣa, to you I bow!
Here I shall set down a brief method for accomplishing Noble Mañjughoṣa, consisting of preparation,
main part and conclusion.
The first part, the preparation, includes the refuge and bodhichitta and the seven branch practice.
1. Taking Refuge and Arousing Bodhichitta
namo sangye chö tsok kündüpé
Namo! I take refuge in Mañjughoṣa,
jampalyang la kyab su chi
Embodiment of Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
dro nam changchub tob chirdu
So that all beings may attain enlightenment,
jampal drub la tsönpar gyi
I shall exert myself in the practice of Mañjuśrī!
2. The Seven Branch Practice
ngö sham yitrul chöpé tsok
Plentiful gifts, both actual and imagined,
mizé dzö kyi khorlor bul
As an inexhaustible treasury, I offer.
shying gi dul nyé lü trul né
Emanating bodies as numerous as atoms in the universe,
go sum güpé chaktsal lo
I offer homage, as devotion fills my body, speech and mind.
ché rang khana mato kün
All wrongs, whether naturally harmful or transgressions,
nong shying gyöpé sem kyi shak
I confess, my mind overflowing with regret and remorse.
mikmé yeshe dampa dang
Genuine wisdom that is beyond all concepts,
sönam gé la yi rang ngo
And ordinary merit too—in all forms of virtue, I rejoice!
rikchen nam la gang tsampar
In accordance with the capacities of beings,
chö kyi khorlo korwar kul
Turn the wheel of Dharma, I implore you!
dampa nya ngen da shyé nam
Great saints intent on passing into nirvana:
jisi bardu shyuk su sol
Stay until the very ends of existence, I pray!
di tsön gé tsok ji sakpa
All the virtue this represents, all that has been amassed,
lamé changchub tob chir ngo
I dedicate towards unsurpassed enlightenment.
The Main Practice
rang dün namkhar ja ö long
In the space before me, amidst an expanse of rainbow light,
pé dé den la kechik gi
Upon seats of lotus and moon-disc, there instantly appears
pakchok jetsün jampal yang
The supreme and noble Mañjughoṣa,
shyal chik chak nyi dzum shyalchen
With one face, two hands and a smiling expression.
chak yé raldri yön pema
He wields a sword in his right hand, and clasps a lotus with his left.
shyab nyi kyiltrung longchö dzok
His two legs are crossed, and he in sambhogakāya form,
dar dang rinchen gyen gyi tré
His body bedecked with the silk and jewel adornments.
tong sal ö kyi kyilkhor chen
Empty yet appearing, with a mandala of light,
sangye changsem drubpé tsok
He is encircled completely
nam kyi yongsu korwar sam
By buddhas, bodhisattvas and accomplished adepts.
tuk ü da teng dhih yik lé
In his heart’s centre, upon a lunar disc, is a syllable Dhīḥ,
ö trö dak la timpa yi
Radiating light, which dissolves into me.
choktün ngödrub kün tob né
Through this, may I gain all supreme and ordinary siddhis,
drib nyi münpa kün sel shying
May the darkness of the two veils be dispelled entirely,
shejé né nam khyenpa yi
May the eight treasures of perfect eloquence,
pobpé ter gyé drolwa dang
Which are born of universal knowledge, be released,
dön nyi lhün gyi drubpar shok
And may I spontaneously fulfill my own and others’ aims.
om ah ra pa tsa na dhih
oṃ arapacana dhīḥ
After reciting the mantra, continue the practice with:
Conclusion
This has four parts.
1. Offering and Praise
nang shying sipé chö nam kün
The whole of appearance and existence,
tingdzin chötrin gyatso yi
Filled with clouds of offerings through samadhi
kang té jetsün jamyang la
To you, Noble Mañjuśrī, I offer—
chöpé sönam tsok dzok shok
Through this, may I perfect the accumulation of merit!
om arya manjushri argham padam pushpe dhupe aloke gandhe naivedye shabda pratitccha svaha
sé ché gyalwa tamché kyi
Embodiment of all the enlightened activity
trinlé chikdü drowé gön
Of all the buddhas and their bodhisattva heirs
jetsün jampal pawo la
Brave warrior Mañjuśrī, to you
chok tu depé chaktsal tö
With the utmost faith and devotion, I offer homage and praise!
2. Prayer
deng né tserab tamché du
From now on, throughout all my lives,
jetsün khyé kyi jezung né
May you always care for and protect me,
ché tsö tsom la tokmé pé
And grant me the wisdom of a lord of speech
mawé wangchuk sherab tsol
Unhindered in explanation, debate and composition.
3. Dissolution
zö né tenjung nangnyen du
From the very beginning, as a reflection of dependent origination,
sharwé yeshe gyumé ku
Arisen, illusory body of wisdom,
trödral jamyang khyé nyi ni
Beyond all conceptual elaboration. Mañjuśrī, you
machö deshyin long du tim
Dissolve into the expanse of unaltered suchness.
4. Dedication of Merit
di drubpa lé jungwa yi
May whatever sources of virtue there may be
getsa jinyé chipa kün
Arising through this practice
dro nam jampal pawo yi
All be dedicated so that beings everywhere
gopang chok la gö chir ngo
May attain the supreme status of the warrior Mañjuśrī.
Aboard the great ship of the three marvellous wisdoms
May all beings set sail, and propelled by the golden oars of aspiration
May they cross over the ocean of existence
To reach the primordial kingdom.

It had been my intention for some time to compose this sādhana of Mañjuśrī entitled Light from
Wisdom’s Sun, but then, in response to the requests of Dechen Drimé,1 I, Thupten Lungrik
Mawé Nyima,2 composed this. May it be the cause for all beings arriving at the level of
the warrior Mañjuśrī.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2009. With many thanks to Alak Zenkar Rinpoche for kindly granting
the reading transmission and correcting errors in the text.
↑ Dechen Drimé was Alak Zenkar Rinpoche’s disciplinary tutor.↑ Rinpoche composed the text when
he was fifteen years old, c. 1958.